# Beyond Classroom Diversity: How Community Context Influences Student Achievement in New York State

By Emma Medina, Joshua Smith & Kevin Nguyen


### Abstract

> Over the past 30 years, an interesting phenomenon has taken shape in education systems in the United States: public schools have become increasingly racially segregated, despite rising levels of national diversity. While previous studies link greater diversity to better student performance, the focus remains largely on diversity in the classroom. Yet a large educational and psychological body of literature suggests that relational diversity -- the discrepancy of diversity experienced in one’s surroundings versus the classroom -- is an important factor in educational performance. We provide one of the first empirical test of this hypothesis within the context of New York State -- where blacks and Hispanics face the highest rates of educational segregation in the country -- using geocoded data on public schools merged with census data on diversity in the surrounding area. The findings have important implications for policies on school redistricting, zoning, and integration, and how these relate to student academic performance.

### Introduction/Research Question

In the fall of 2015, the New York City Department of Education announced its proposal to rezone the two schools in the Upper West Side, shifting students from PS 199 to PS 191. While the two schools are located within only five blocks of each other, the student bodies are radically different. PS 199 is comprised of mainly affluent, white students and admittance is sought after by many of the area’s wealthiest residents, while PS 191 is predominantly black and Hispanic, located across the street from an underserved housing project, and was recently added to the state’s list of persistently dangerous schools. When the planned shift was announced in September, it was met with fierce opposition from several parent groups, citing safety concerns and poor testing results. Even the District 3 community education council and borough president weighed in, stating that the transition was too sudden and that more steps needed to be undertaken before the rezoning could be implemented. In response, the DOE revised its earlier decision in November, in a statement: “we have been unable to reach a consensus… more time is needed to work with the community to develop a long term plan… the DOE will not present a plan at this time”(Taylor, 2015).

In the past 30 years, an interesting phenomenon has taken shape. Around the country, schools and school systems are becoming increasingly segregated (Aud, Fox, and Kewal Ramani, 2010; Stiefel, Schwartz, and Gould Ellen, 2007; Kucsera and Orfield, 2014). A recent article posted in ProPublica looked at trends over the past half-decade, showing that racial diversity in classrooms is declining and that students are now more likely to be in a class comprised of racially similar students than they were two decades ago (Hannah-Jones, 2014). A 2011 study showed that nearly half of all black students in public schools attend a school that was comprised of a minority student population of 90% or more (Bouie, 2015).

These statistics seem to run counter to the changing national demographics that show the United States is becoming more diverse and less white than in the past. As the author of the ProPublica piece notes, schools are no longer racially disparate by policy or law, yet the “segregation as it is practiced today… is no less pernicious.” (Hannah-Jones, 2014). Even though school systems have been opened and discrimination on the basis of race is no longer permitted, many other social and demographic shifts have caused this inverse trend, including housing prices and property tax laws (Hanushek and Rivkin, 2002; Cordes, Schwartz, Stiefel, and Zabel, 2015), longer term “white flight,” and more recent “gentrification” in urban areas (Bischoff, 2014; Richards, 2014). These shifts have led to the increased significance of school zone boundaries, which ultimately determine school attendance within a community. Gerrymandered school districts as well as recent judicial movements releasing school districts from oversight have further exacerbated the issue, often under the guise of “race-neutral” restrictions that impede the ability of school officials to create more diversified classrooms and schools (Richards, 2014). As the case of PS 199 illustrates, the present-day racial divide is often both a cultural and political construct that has persisted for decades.

The effects of diversity in schools have wide ranging implications. Classroom interactions often provide the best exposure to peers and most meaningful influence on socialization skills for school-aged children. While past studies have shown that increasing students’ contact with classmates from different racial and ethnic backgrounds has a positive effect on academic achievement, there is a growing body of literature that demonstrates there are even more important benefits related to social-emotional skills and relationship-building abilities. These effects can be seen directly in the short term-- measured by decreased incidents of behavioral issues, reduced suspension rates and disciplinary actions-- but researchers are only now examining the long term impacts associated with early exposure to racially diverse peers: increased secondary and postsecondary educational attainment, improved occupational attainment, enhanced workplace readiness in a globalized economy, and stronger relationship-building abilities (Center for American Progress). Given the more recent understanding of classroom diversity’s enduring impact on students, the significance of racial integration in schools goes well beyond classroom performance. It also serves as a counterpoint to the conventional argument that community integration necessarily precedes school integration; as schools become more diverse, it will in turn make occupational and residential integration more viable. This critical point underscores the the larger social value of school desegregation.

Given the large and significant barriers to integrating schools (Bischoff, 2014; Richards, 2014), we specifically seek to analyze the effects of “relational diversity,” defined as the discrepancy of racial integration experienced in one’s surroundings versus the classroom. Using geospatial analysis (Saporito and Riper, 2015), we will focus on the marginal impact of this discrepancy. This method is appealing in terms of policy implications, as it confines itself to the realm of education policy-- on the judicial, district, and local level-- and does not require reform in other related fields, such as housing, property taxes, and demographic trends. Accounting for the racial composition of the community, we will determine the direct impact of making schools more or less diverse, compared to their encompassing census tract, on academic outcomes, as measured by student performance on annual state English Language Arts exams. Stated another way, we will attempt to answer the following question:

> “What is the impact of relational diversity on student academic achievement?”

__End of preview.  We'll be finished with the paper by mid May.__
